Bala Garden Case Study
Eastern Shan State
July 2018




Executive Summary


The Bala Garden is a community service organization which was launched in June of 2018 in the Eastern Shan State. The initial vision sprang largely from the passion of a single individual (Mi Jum, an Akha woman), but it required two years of steady encouragement along with a collaboration of like-minded partners in order to see it realized. The change agent in this story is therefore no single person, but rather a small group shaped by its own collective wisdom, however inspired and coached by a Hope reflection process. In its first instantiation the Bala Garden began with a focus on access to education for rural young women, but as a result of the small group collaboration it has now grown to also include activities in sustainable agriculture, public health, family counseling, and with aspirations for a retreat center that will help address issues of social trauma.


The Bala Garden case, when compared with other small groups Hope has accompanied over the last decade, has achieved a measure of community impact over a remarkably short period (roughly two years). For comparison, other such groups (some of which have been active for 8 or 9 years) still evince a strong emphasis on personal change and have not pursued change beyond their immediate relationships. Bala Garden as an organization is relatively young, and in many ways just getting started, but on the question of how people can move from psychic change to community change, it offers a number of instructive insights.




The Education of Mi Jum


Mi Jum is from a poor Akha family in the eastern Shan State. When she was 8 her family moved across the border to Thailand, as many Akha people have done over the years, seeking out a better economic future. She had never gone to school in Myanmar, and so the experience of discovering education and opportunities in Thailand struck her like an epiphany: even women could have choices in their lives. 


She was raised to speak both Thai and Akha, as there is a sizeable Akha migrant community in northern Thailand. Since she never went to school in Myanmar, she had never learned Burmese very well, yet felt some connection to her people still in Myanmar. As she went on to finish her own studies, she struggled to know what she really wanted to do with her life. "I had lots of dreams, but had a hard time settling on just one," she relates. She retained a vague desire to share her experience of education and opportunity with more young women who came from backgrounds such as hers, but for a long time doubted there was much she could do.




A group for social change


In 2015 a group of people who wanted to explore solutions to social issues was starting to form in Keng Tung, in the eastern Shan State. Dr. Jo Hsaw is the figure who played the most central role in connecting them together, and he started as a skeptic.


He had previously become friendly with Khun Hpung, who leads much of Hope International's Personal Leadership Development (PLD) workshops. He had sat in on one of Khun Hpung's workshops in the area, but he confesses that it left him cold. "It just didn't make sense to me, honestly. We were familiar with other workshops on other topics, where you could just follow along and do the activities that were practical and pretty straightforward. PLD wasn't like that. There was a lot of open-ended introspection without a clear outcome." It wasn't that it was bad, it was just that he wasn't sure it was of any use.


Like any good skeptic, instead of simply dismissing PLD he found an opportunity to put it to the test. There was at the time a bitter dispute, centered on the Akha Cultural Association, about the appropriate script for the Akha language.  It may have seemed pedantic and petty to outsiders, but to those involved it was a significant matter of cultural identity, and a contentious one. Jo Hsaw thought he'd try an experiment to see if PLD could break the logjam.


He invited Khun Hpung up for a workshop, invited several members of the cultural association, several other people from the Baptist association, as well as some others involved in social work. "Honestly, I didn't know if it would make things better or worse," he admits. "It was a 4-day workshop, and even as late as day 3 there were complaints from the participants, 'What is all this about? We don't get it. You're making us think too much.'  But on the evening of the 4th day everyone was quiet and thoughtful, and it seemed it had started to get through to them. On the final discussion of the last day, I felt like people came together and we came away with a good outcome."


Jo Hsaw wouldn't pretend that he understood what exactly had happened or why, but he now had a strong indication that the PLD process - whatever that meant - helped people deal with an intractable quarrel in a more constructive way. He didn't even have to really try to coordinate another meeting, because the other participants pushed to make it happen on their own initiative.


There were around 10 people involved at that first workshop, and they started to meet on their own for further discussions. Some moved away or dropped out of the group for other reasons (e.g. a young person went away to university), "so we became more deliberate about who to invite to later meetings, and we had to do that before the group really came together. By the second workshop at the end of 2015, we had 18 people." That second workshop was held just across the border in Thailand, and it was the first one to which Mi Jum was invited.




Mi Jum and PLD


Still indecisive about her future, Mi Jum was invited by one of her social-worker friends in late 2015 to attend this workshop that might help her find direction. She says now that it was just what she needed at the time: it challenged her to "really focus on the question of the life I wanted to choose for myself." She came to see clearly that her motivating passion was to help poor women and children in Myanmar get an education, and resolved to finally do something about this.


Her family was not encouraging. "You don't even speak Burmese!", they pointed out, "It's impossible." She felt compelled to try anyway, that "PLD encouraged me to believe that it would not be impossible if I committed myself," but she admits in retrospect that her confidence was not high. She and her husband resettled in Keng Tung late in 2015, and set about improving their Burmese and building a life there.




Keng Tung boarding house


Mi Jum's first attempt at realizing her vision was to start a boarding house for poor girls in downtown Keng Tung. This boarding house model is not unusual in Myanmar, where some of the rural villages don't have their own government schools. The government schools themselves are not designed to house boarders, and so the situation creates a demand for third parties (sometimes relatives, sometimes a church or other organization) to house poor young people who need to live within walking distance of a school. Mi Jum's boarding house started with 6 girls in early 2016. Even this small number required some persuasion, as many families in poorer villages simply did not see the point of education for girls.


She and her husband rented a small place adjacent to a Catholic church. It was a start, but the rent was relatively high, and the limited space constrained the ways Mi Jum wanted to see things grow. She saw, for example, that the future she wanted for these young girls was more than just in reading and writing.  It should also develop their capacity to make bold choices in their lives, just as she was learning to do, and this would mean working more with their families, as it was often the family dynamics which stood in the way of daughters standing on their own two feet.




Bala Garden Advisory Board


At the same time that the boarding house was getting off the ground, she was now meeting regularly with the PLD group, which was now coming together 3 or 4 times a month. It was a diverse set of people, including people from 3 different ethnic groups, 3 women, 3 Buddhists, 2 Roman Catholics, a doctor, a social worker, an agricultural association worker, and several people from the Akah Baptist Association. When asked what they talked about in those early days, Jo Hsaw summarizes it this way, "It was a lot of 'How can we get started?' We would talk about what sort of outreach we wanted to do," but it was mostly aspirational at first.


The PLD workshops had inspired people, but hadn't helped them think about what to do with that inspiration. "That PLD workshop motivated people, but it also confused them with new thoughts being stirred up. It didn't bring resolution. The group discussions we had together on our own helped us process and move things along. The discussions also built trust between us, as we shared openly with one another our struggles with our personal lives, and this also built confidence that we could work together."  Members of their PLD group cluster in 3 broad areas, Jo Hsaw observes: the 'spiritual group' (i.e. those who work for a church association), the 'cultural group' (i.e. those who work for one of the cultural associations), and the 'social work' group.


Little by little, the conversation shifted from, 'How can we get started?' to supporting one another with practical activities. Jo Hsaw, for example, had medical outreach activities, where he would go out to villages, take a few medical colleagues with him, and offer training on some public health issue while also providing basic clinic services. Sometimes Mi Jum would go with him and talk about education for girls or provide family counseling. 




Grand (re)opening


After two years Mi Jum came to the point where she knew she would have to leave the small Keng Tung location in order to grow the Bala Garden in the way that she wanted. She also knew she needed help to do this. In order even just to write a funding proposal they needed to have a clear organization with a mission statement, an advisory board, and some legal help so that they could be recognized by the government. She turned to the support of the PLD group members once again. From the outset she insisted that only PLD group members be on her advisory board, "That way I knew we would at least speak the same language."


The most difficult strategic issue the Bala Garden board had to work through was whether and how to be linked to the Akha Baptist Association (ABA). Aligning the Bala Garden with the Baptist Association would be the easiest path to formal government recognition for her social work, but it brought with it the risk of church leaders trying to assert control. Some members of her board held leadership positions within the association, but even they acknowledged that there were reasons to be wary. It took some time for the advisory board of PLD members to talk through the pros and cons of such an arrangement, and for those board members from the ABA to negotiate an understanding that the Bala Garden would retain its autonomy for decision-making. There are many in the ABA who feel that their proper work is purely spiritual (e.g. bible studies, worship services), such that social work is not something they should be involved with, so the process involved some effort to persuade the organization to broaden its mission as well. Finally an MOU was signed with the ABA in early 2018, while money for the land and construction (around $6000 US) was acquired through a network of donors in Thailand.


In June of 2018 the Bala Garden had its grand opening in its new location on a plot of land on a hillside about half an hour outside of Keng Tung. In addition to housing 21 young students, in a continuation of the boarding house function that had been started in downtown Keng Tung, they relaunched with a frog farm and a large garden as the beginning of their sustainable agriculture training projects. Bala Garden activities include youth camps (connected to the church), family training, medical outreach visits (Jo Saw's focus), and mentoring young adults. Mi Jum and her board hope to eventually build a retreat center on the same property, but that will require a future round of funding, and they are working on building out the activities that they have for now.




PLD's contribution


When pressed on what PLD brought that they didn't have already, the members are clear to say that PLD alone wasn't enough. Jo Saw observed, "All our participants were already oriented toward outreach activities. We had already gone through other kinds of training workshops, and had lots of ideas about things to do. But what we were lacking was the confidence to take initiative, to really commit, make choices, jump in and make a start. It needed the group talking through things together, and building on PLD, to overcome that missing confidence." Other members of the PLD group are also clear to emphasize the importance of the incubation process - the ongoing dialogue, fitful starts, setbacks, and nudges from advisors and peers - and not just the moments of epiphany.


Mi Jum adds, "PLD doesn't bring new ideas, it just brings a kind of steady, daily practice that allows you to clarify your own ideas, your own priorities, and lay out the choices in front of you. It also helps you avoid getting distracted by fears about what other people will think or say, which holds a lot of us back."


As much as Mi Jum has come to value the PLD process in her own life, she recognizes that it wouldn't work for every audience in the same form. In particular, the poor and often illiterate village families with which she works so closely would need a rather different approach, one more tailored to their life experiences and perhaps a bit less academic in its conceptions. She hasn't really thought through how to do such an adaptation, but she says they've started to talk about it in the PLD group.




Comparison with Kachin Education initiative


In February of 2018 four members of the Bala Garden advisory board traveled up to see the Kachin mother-tongue-based education project, centered in the northern Shan state. They were impressed with what they saw, but came away with two distinct ways in which they thought they were different.


In the first place, the Kachin initiative is an ambitious overhaul of the entire education system, soup to nuts. A new curriculum is written, teachers are trained from scratch at a system-level training center, and communities raise their own schools from the ground up. Even if resources were not an issue, educational reform at scale is not really what the Bala Garden is after. "We agreed with them that education is the main way to change the community, but we want to start small, not reinvent the whole thing," Mi Jum explains.


In the second place, the Kachin initiative is oriented around the self-empowerment of a specific ethnic group, the Kachin themselves. This is inspiring for many of the downtrodden ethnic groups in the borderlands, but the Bala Garden sees itself as serving a broader population. "One thing that troubled us," Jo Hsaw relates, "was this idea of working for just one ethnic group and not the whole community. That's not how we'd prefer to be. We don't just want to work for the Akha people. Some of us wanted to do something like they were doing, but at the end of the day I don't think we're like the Kachin. Most people here are happy to learn Burmese and go to Burmese school; we are not fiercely independent like the Kachin." 




Reflections


The Bala Garden initiative is in many respects just getting started, but offers much food for thought on the question of how people can move from personal change to community change.


The first such lesson that can be gleaned is the important but limited role that PLD has played. Eastern Shan State participants have come to recognize that there is a crucial mental blocker to their exercise of initiative, and PLD is particularly well targeted at surfacing and removing this obstacle. The core issue is variously sketched out with words and phrases like 'confidence,' 'boldness,' 'decisiveness,' 'fear of what others think,' 'waiting for permission,' etc. It is clear that there is a set of overlapping psycho-social issues which collectively inhibit any action that would challenge the status quo or conventional wisdom. The therapeutic role of PLD in this process is that it allows people to find the strength to swim against those currents.


The second lesson is that this process is greatly aided by a clear, practical goal. Particularly when one compares the Bala Garden case with other PLD groups in other areas of the country, many of whom have been active for many more years, it seems that PLD has the most rapid impact in situations where it supplies a final, missing ingredient (i.e. courage, resolve to get started) rather than being relied on to generate vision or practical direction. This is not to say that PLD can't be an effective component of a more multifaceted strategy which also tries to forge a new strategic direction, but rather that the low-hanging fruit for PLD success would be in those areas where the raw materials for community action are already in place, and it's mainly the mental obstacles that stand in the way.


That said, Mi Jum had a specific bit of advice which might argue against a low-hanging-fruit approach. Looking back on it now, she feels that the Bala Garden effort could have benefitted from a more structured and intentional incubation process. Such a process could steer participants toward concrete action. She was very fortunate to have had a supportive group of people who effectively provided this incubation informally, on a peer-to-peer level, but she thinks there is room for Hope's accompaniment to anticipate and try to program around this need. In fact, she says that this is how she approaches her own mentoring activities: trying to provide the more intentional incubation from which she herself would have benefitted.


In sum, the recipe for the success (so far) of the Bala Garden seems to have 3 essential ingredients. First, a fertile ground of practical ideas for community activities which people are already inclined to pursue. Second, a psycho-social therapy which cultivates the courage to act in the face of likely sources of discouragement, both internal and external. And finally, and perhaps most crucially, a supportive group of collaborators who can steadfastly refine the vision and reinforce the conviction to persevere. Without any of these factors, the achievement of the Bala Garden would seem unlikely.